The European AI Office supports the development and adoption of trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions, while protecting people against risks.
The European AI Office was
established within the European Commission
as the foundation for a single AI governance system. It supports the
EU approach to AI
, playing a key role in implementing the
AI Act
– especially for
general-purpose AI (GPAI)
– guaranteeing the health, safety and fundamental rights of people and providing legal certainty to businesses. It also enforces the rules for GPAI models and supports the governance bodies in Member States in their tasks. This is underpinned by the powers given to the Commission by the AI Act, including the ability to conduct evaluations of GPAI models, request information and measures from model providers, and apply sanctions.
The AI Office also promotes an
innovative ecosystem of trustworthy AI
, to reap the societal and economic benefits. It ensures a strategic, coherent and effective European approach to AI at
international level
, becoming a global reference point.
The Structure of the AI Office
The AI Office employs more than 125 staff, including technology specialists, administrative assistants, lawyers, policy specialists, and economists. It has 6 units and 2 advisers, reflecting its mandate:
“Excellence in AI and Robotics” - unit A1
“Regulation and Compliance” - unit A2
“AI Safety” - unit A3
“AI Innovation and Policy Coordination” - unit A4
“AI for Societal Good” - unit A5
"AI in Health and Life Science" - unit A6
Lead Scientific Adviser
International Affairs Adviser
Tasks of the AI Office
Supporting the AI Act and enforcing general-purpose AI rules
The AI Office makes use of its expertise to support the implementation and
enforcement of the AI Act
by:
Contributing to the
coherent application of the AI Act
across the Member States, including the set-up of advisory bodies at EU level, facilitating support and information exchange
Developing
tools, methodologies and benchmarks for evaluating capabilities
and reach of general-purpose AI models, and
classifying models
with systemic risks
Drawing up
state-of-the-art codes of practice
to detail out rules, in cooperation with leading AI developers, the scientific community and other experts
Preparing
guidance and guidelines, implementing and delegated acts
, and other tools to support effective implementation of the AI Act and
monitor compliance
with the regulation
Investigating possible infringements
of the rules, including inspections, requests for technical documentation and access to models in order to assess models' capabilities
Requesting providers to
take corrective action
and, in case of infringement,
restrict
the public availability of a
model
and
issue direct fines for non-compliance
Strengthening the development and use of trustworthy AI
The AI Office, in collaboration with relevant public and private actors and the startup community, contributes to fostering trustworthy AI across the EU by:
Advancing
actions and policies to reap the societal and economic benefits
of AI across the EU
Providing advice on best practices and enabling ready-access to
AI sandboxes, real-world testing and other European support structures
for AI uptake
Encouraging
innovative ecosystems of trustworthy AI
to enhance the EU’s competitiveness and economic growth
Aiding the
Commission in leveraging the use of transformative AI tools
and reinforcing AI literacy
Fostering international cooperation
At international level, the AI Office contributes to a strategic, coherent, and effective EU approach, by:
Promoting the
EU’s approach to trustworthy AI
, including collaboration with similar institutions worldwide
Fostering international cooperation and governance on AI,
contributing to a global approach to AI
Supporting the
development and implementation of international agreements
on AI
Cooperation with institutions, experts and stakeholders
The
AI Office collaborates
with
Member States
and the wider
expert community
through dedicated platforms:
The
European Artificial Intelligence Board (AI Board)
is a key advisory body supported by the AI Office that includes representatives from each EU Member States and the
European Centre for Algorithmic Transparency
(ECAT). The AI Board’s primary role is to ensure the effective implementation of the AI Act across the EU by coordinating national authorities, sharing technical and regulatory expertise and providing advice on AI policy, innovation, and international partnerships.
The
Scientific Panel
of independent experts ensures a strong link with the scientific community. Further technical expertise is gathered in an
Advisory Forum
, representing a balanced selection of stakeholders, including industry, startups and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs), academia, think tanks and civil society.
The AI Office also oversees the
AI Pact
, which allows businesses to engage with the Commission and other stakeholders to share best practices and join activities. This engagement has started before the AI Act entered into force and allows businesses to plan ahead and prepare for the full implementation of the AI Act. To stay up to date and register, check the
AI Pact events
.
The
Apply AI Alliance
is the main coordination forum bringing together AI providers, industry leaders, academia and the public sector to ensure policy actions are grounded in the real-world needs. Closely connected to the Alliance, an AI Observatory will track AI trends and assess impact of AI in specific sectors.
Initiatives promoting the development and adoption of AI
The AI Office actively supports innovators through policies and initiatives that spur growth across the EU:
The
AI Continent action plan
, launched in April 2025, explains how to harness the untapped potential of EU researchers and industries, turning EU strengths – such as unparalleled talent and strong traditional industries – into AI accelerators. The plan promotes economic growth and competitiveness in areas such as healthcare, cars, science.
The
Apply AI Strategy
, launched in October 2025, complements the action plan. It aims to boost AI adoption and innovation across Europe, particularly among SMEs. It is designed to enhance the competitiveness of strategic sectors and strengthen the EU’s tech sovereignty.
In June 2026, the
'AI omnibus'
(part of the
Digital Simplification Package
) was adopted, introducing targeted amendments to the AI Act to ensure the rules remain clear, simple, and innovation-friendly. The
amendments entered into force
on 27 July.
The ‘
GenAI4EU
' initiative, part of the 2024
AI innovation package
, contributes to the development of novel use cases and emerging applications in 14 industrial sectors and the public sector.
Other initiatives aimed at boosting the development and uptake of AI are:
AI Factories
Testing and Experimentation Facilities (TEFS) and sandboxes
European Digital Innovation Hubs (EDIHs)
AI skills and literacy
Job opportunities and collaboration
The AI Office recruits talent from a wide range of backgrounds for policy, technical and legal roles and administrative support. To apply, complete the
Expression of Interest Form
. For inquiries, please contact us at the following addresses:
Recruitment:
CNECT-AIOFFICE-RECRUITMENT@ec.europa.eu
General Inquiries:
CNECT-AIOFFICE@ec.europa.eu
Important: These email addresses are for inquiries only. Applications must be submitted through the dedicated form, not via email.
Quick Links
Any question on the AI Act? Visit our Single Information Platform
AI Continent action plan
Apply AI strategy
AI Act
AI Pact
European approach to artificial intelligence
AI factories
AI in health
AI tools for cities
AI for public good
Apply AI Alliance
AI skills and literacy
EU international engagement on AI
Upcoming guidelines supporting the implementation of the AI Act
Latest News
PRESS RELEASE
|
31 July 2026
Commission starts enforcing AI Act rules and new transparency requirements on 2 August
PRESS RELEASE
|
30 July 2026
EU launches AI Gigafactories call to boost Europe's computing capacity and unlock more than €30 billion in investment
EVENT
|
02 September 2026
AI-powered robotics in Europe: Live demonstrations and strategic debate
EVENT
|
14 September 2026
Kick-off of new GenAI pilots for public administration & Apply AI stakeholder meeting
PRESS RELEASE
|
20 July 2026
Commission publishes guidelines on transparency obligations for providers and deployers of certain AI systems
EVENT
|
20 October 2026 - 21 October 2026
Advanced Virtual Human Twins (VHT) Platform - Annual Event
Browse Artificial intelligence
Related Content
Big Picture
Artificial Intelligence
Europe is transforming into the AI continent by fostering the development and uptake of new AI applications while ensuring that AI remains safe and respect EU values.
AI Board
The European Artificial Intelligence Board (the "AI Board") is a key advisory body that was created...
AI Act Advisory Forum
The Advisory Forum is a general advisory body to the European Commission and the AI Board...
AI Act Scientific Panel
The Scientific Panel advises the AI Office and national authorities on the implementation the AI Act...
EU international engagement on Artificial Intelligence
The AI Office leads the EU's international engagement on AI – from promoting safe and trustworthy AI...
Other
AI for Public Good
Artificial Intelligence has the power to drive meaningful change, improving lives and tackling some...
AI tools for Cities
The European Commission will provide a suite of advanced tools enabling urban planners to optimise...
Last update
31 July 2026
Print as PDF