The Commission has issued guidelines to clarify the scope of the obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models under the AI Act. These obligations entered into application on 2 August 2025.
The
guidelines on the scope of obligations for providers of general-purpose AI (GPAI) models
(available in the 24 EU official languages) help actors in the AI ecosystem understand whether the obligations apply to them and what is expected of them, ensuring they can innovate with confidence.
Key points of the guidelines
Clear definitions
: The guidelines introduce straightforward technical criteria, for instance for when an AI model is considered "general-purpose." This helps developers understand if they need to comply with the obligations under the AI Act.
Pragmatic approach
: The guidelines are designed to be pragmatic. For instance, they clarify that only those making significant modifications to AI models need to comply with the obligations for providers of GPAI models, not those making minor changes.
Exemptions for open-source
: The guidelines also clarify under what conditions providers of open-source AI models are exempt from certain obligations, to promote transparency and innovation.
Why are these guidelines important?
The guidelines explain how the Commission interprets key terms in the
AI Act
. This helps actors in the AI ecosystem understand who is expected to follow which obligations. Thus, the guidelines complement the
General-Purpose AI Code of Practice
, a voluntary, practical tool that explains how providers of GPAI models can fulfil their obligations under the AI Act.
Application and enforcement timeline
From
2 August 2025
, the
obligations for providers
of GPAI models
entered into application
. Providers of GPAI models placed on the market after this date must comply and are expected to informally collaborate with the AI Office’s technical staff. In particular, providers of the most advanced models, i.e. those that pose systemic risks, are legally obliged to notify the AI Office of these models. The
AI Office
supports providers in their compliance, especially the
Code of Practice signatories
.
From
2 August 2026
, the
Commission’s enforcement powers
enter
into application
. The Commission will enforce compliance with the obligations for providers of GPAI models, including with fines.
By
2 August 2027
,
providers
of GPAI models
placed on the market before 2 August 2025
must
comply
.
Developed through extensive public consultation with diverse stakeholders, these guidelines, though not legally binding, reflect the Commission's interpretation and will guide enforcement. Providers should review their obligations, assess model risks, prepare for compliance, and engage with the AI Office.
The guidelines for providers of GPAI model help stakeholders across the AI value chain innovate with clarity and confidence.
Submitting documents
Providers of general-purpose AI models must use the
EU SEND platform
to submit documents related to their obligations to the AI Office. EU SEND
ensures the
confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity
of the information shared. The
Explanatory Notice (available in all EU official languages)
explains the template.
Providers of general-purpose AI models (or their authorised representatives where applicable) should submit documents related to:
Notifications of a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk pursuant to Art 51(2) and 52(2) of the AI Act
Requests for reassessment pursuant to Art 52(5) of the AI Act
Reports of serious incident pursuant to Art 55(1)(c) of the AI Act
Safety and Security Framework and Model Report pursuant to Measures 1.4 and 7.7 of the Safety and Security Chapter of the GPAI Code of Practice
Reports on how providers of general-purpose AI models who have not signed the General-Purpose AI Code of Practice intend to comply with the AI Act, as outlined in the Guidelines on the scope of obligations for providers of general-purpose AI (GPAI) models, Section 5.1.
Download the technical guidance for submitting documents via EU SEND
Quick links
Download the guidelines for providers of general-purpose AI models
How can providers sign the GPAI Code of Practice?
AI Act
Q&A: Guidelines on obligations for General-Purpose AI providers
Q&A: Template for GPAI model providers to summarise their training content
The General-Purpose AI Code of Practice
Template for the Public Summary of Training Content for GPAI models
Related Content
Big Picture
European approach to artificial intelligence
The EU’s approach to artificial intelligence promotes excellence and trust, by boosting research and industrial capacity while ensuring safety and fundamental rights.
Last update
28 April 2026
Print as PDF