This page aims to provide an easily accessible overview of AI safety standard setting under the EU AI Act. It covers the broader context and rationale for EU AI standard setting, the standard setting process, and questions of when AI Act standards might be finished.
This resource was first put together in 2023 byHadrien Pouget, then AI policy expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. It was updated in June 2025 byKoen Holtman, standards expert at the AI Standards Lab, andTekla Emborg, EU policy researcher at the Future of Life Institute.
Note: we focus on explaining the formal EU-based AI safety standard setting effort that is on-going in the so-calledCEN-CENELEC JTC21 standards committee. Other AI standards writing efforts, like theISO/IEC, are not covered.
The EU has a particular mechanism that envisages the writing of technical standards that become officially approved ‘manuals’ that describe how companies and other actors can comply with EU safety regulation. The central idea is that such standards, known as ‘harmonized and cited standards’ when approved, can provide a presumption of conformity of legal requirements. If a company demonstrates that their product or system complies with a harmonized and cited standard, market surveillance authorities and courts will presume that they comply with the corresponding legal requirement.
For the AI Act, the European Commission has requested an initial batch of such standards to be written for the AI Act and the writing is currently in process. This initial batch will cover the requirements for providers of high-risk AI systems. The Commission may request additional standards covering other parts of the AI Act in the future.
The EU standards request mechanism implies a division of labour. It allows the EU legislator to simply specify in the AI Actthatcertain safety related outcomes have to be achieved by AI model or system providers, and specifythatgenerally acknowledgedstate-of-the-art methods of safety engineering shall be applied when achieving these outcomes. The text of the Act does not go into technical detail about what these state-of-the-art methods actually are. The expectation is that technical experts writing standards will fill in these details. The legislator further anticipates that these standards will be updated if the state of the art changes.
We should note at the outset that standards are not the only documents that can detail how to comply with the AI Act. For example, requirements for general-purpose AI providers are clarified in aCode of Practice writing effort. Furthermore, some AI Act requirements will be further clarified in guideline documents penned by the European Commission.
The use of standards as a means of compliance remains voluntary. Providers may ignore the harmonised standards, and rely on independently interpreting the legal text. For their interpretation they may rely on books, guides, web sites, or legal opinions written by independent authors or industry alliances. Such independent work does not have the officially approved status of standards, and will not give a presumption of conformity, but it may be available earlier or be more customised to a specific situation.
Our goal is to build themost useful, authoritative, and comprehensive guide to the AI Act anywhere on the internet. We’ll never put this behind a paywall or use it to sell you a service. We do this because we think good AI governance matters, and that means making authoritative guidance genuinely accessible.
If you want to help us out, please considercontributing a guest postto help others understand and navigate the Act, orsend your ideas and feedbackfor the website to me (Taylor, Design & Web Manager) at:websites@futureoflife.org. To stay up-to-date,subscribe to our bi-weeklyAI Act newsletter, the world’s most trusted regular AI Act publication with over 50,000+ subscribers. We’ve published over 100 updates since 2022.
This website is built and maintained by theFuture of Life Institute— the world’s oldest and largest nonprofit working for the responsible development of AI.
To understand the development of European standards for the AI Act, it is helpful to start off with an overview of the central actors in the process.
The process for developing harmonised standards is complex. It starts with a standards request from the Commission, followed by drafting by the relevant ESO, enquiry, voting, and publication, before the final step of citation of the standards in the Official Journal of the European Union. Each step is explained below. For a more extensive overview, see theCEN website.
Step 1: The Commission Creates a Standardisation Request for the ESOs
Such a request includes details on which part of the corresponding legislation needs to be covered by the requested standards and a requested delivery date. A draft request is refined in consultation with ESOs and other stakeholders to be acceptable to all. Once approved by the Commission and representatives from EU governments, the request is published and ESOs must formally respond. While rejecting a request is possible, ESOs usually accept requests, even if they have doubts about the feasibility of completing the work by the requested delivery date. SeeVademecum on European Standardisationfor further details.
Standards are drafted in technical committees with technical experts from the NSBs. A committee also includes a selection of stakeholders as observers. As mentioned above, the technical committee for the AI Act is a joint committee between CEN and CENELEC called CEN/CENELEC JTC21. Working groups are formed within the committee, where technical experts draft the standards documents. These experts are all volunteers, in the sense that they are not compensated from CEN and CENELEC for their time and effort. Experts are bound by confidentiality rules, for example they cannot reveal details of ongoing discussions or the contents of in-progress working drafts. Unanimous expert agreement, or expert consensus if unanimity is not possible, is needed to pass drafts to the next process step.
Usually the European ESOs try to leverage, and not overrule, existing work in international standards written byISO/IEC(the Organization for International Standardization and the International Electrotechnical Commission). This is to ensure international consistency and is an important part of the WTO’sTechnical Barriers to Trade agreement, which prevents countries from using standards to block international trade.
Enquiry is a voting and commenting step where a complete draft standard prepared by a working group is evaluated by national stakeholders. The NSBs collect and send feedback, which is sent back to the experts in the working group who may update the draft based on the feedback. It is not uncommon that different NSBs give conflicting comments, with one country wanting a change in one direction, another country wanting a different change. It is up to the experts in the working group to handle such conflicts by finding a compromise or plainly rejecting certain comments. Plain rejections run the risk that the country will vote ‘no’ in the next step, formal vote. Very negative feedback during enquiry could trigger a process reset, where large parts of the draft are entirely re-written, with the new version then being submitted to a second enquiry vote. A working group may also decide to resolve concerns by just omitting material that has proven to be very controversial. This may yield a standard that does not fully cover the topics requested in the Standardisation Request anymore.
In this process step, the NSBs formally vote to either accept or reject the standard into which their feedback has been incorporated in the previous step. A ‘no’ vote can trigger another round of drafting and re-submission to a new vote. A ‘yes’ vote can still be accompanied by comments, but these should only propose minor edits.
Based on a successful vote, the standard is published by CEN and CENELEC. Published standards are typically available for purchase in web shops, though some are available for free. Arecent casein front of the European Court of Justice addressed the appropriateness of ESOs charging money for standards that directly support EU Law. At the time of writing, it is unclear what effects these lawsuits will eventually have on the fee-basedfunding model of the ESOs.
Step 6: Assessment Followed by Citation in the Official Journal of the European Union
In the final step, the European Commission will carry out an assessment of whether the published standards correctly satisfy the conditions in the Standardisation Request and correspond to the text in the AI Act. However, the European Commission is also involved during the drafting process, providing feedback in the form of preliminary assessments of the drafts. After completing a successful assessment, the Commission can adopt an implementing act citing the standard in the Official Journal of the European Union (OJEU). This makes the standard a harmonized and cited standard that brings a “presumption of conformity” with the applicable parts of the law.
The Commission maintains awebsitelisting all cited harmonised standards for specific regulated fields. In mature fields, there can be tens or hundreds of such standards, developed and updated over decades.
Simplified view of the standard setting process for the EU AI Act
The timeline below is based on publicly known information as of June 2025.
To understand how standards could clarify the text of the AI Act, let us look at Articles9and8(1) of the AI Act as examples.
Article 9 of the AI Act requires that a high-risk AI system is equipped with ‘risk management measures’ so that ‘relevant residual risk associated with each hazard, as well as the overall residual risk of the high-risk AI systems is judged to be acceptable’. Article 8(1) further specifies that this judgment must be made while taking into account ‘the generally acknowledged state of the art on AI and AI-related technologies’.
As a manual on how to fulfill these obligations, a standard could:
In mature and narrow fields like food safety or electrical engineering, the subject matter experts are often able to determine lab-tested and time-tested numerical thresholds for safe outcomes. For example, in the area of food safety, they may define that the risk of lead poisoning from a food of type A is at an acceptable level if a lab test on a representative sample shows that the lead content is below B parts per million. It is then for non-experts to use the safety standards and ensure safe outcomes according to the state of the art.
In contrast, it is unlikely that the experts working on the high-risk AI standards under the AI Act will be able to come up with similar numeric prescriptions. The field of AI covered by the AI Act is simply too diverse, and unlike in food-safety, it cannot fall back on long-lasting experience with product types that have been in the market for decades or centuries. Thus, the state-of-the art processes defined in the AI safety standards will likely require the involvement of expertise and expert judgement in order to be run correctly.
According to the AI Act, the legal requirements on a first category of high-risk AI systems go into force in October 2026. Ideally, corresponding standards would be available by October 2025 to allow providers sufficient preparation time. However, as is clear from the timeline overview above, these standards are unlikely to be completed by then.
Historically, ESOs have often had difficulties delivering the requested standards on time, even when making an early start, for example relating to the update to the Medical Device Regulation and the Radio Equipment Directive.
Article 41 of the AI Act anticipates potential delays in the development of standards. It allows the European Commission to establish “common specifications,” which would act as official interim guidance until the relevant standards are formally approved. As of the time this post was last updated, the Commission has not publicly indicated any intention to utilise this provision. As shown in the timeline above, the Commission has however indicated that the option of postponing the entry into force of the high-risk requirements, to a date beyond October 2026, could be considered.
The standards process, and the checks and balances inside and around it, have been designed with the intent to create trusted and democratic outcomes. However, the standards development process has been subject to critique on several points. This includes critique that the process happens behind closed doors without transparency. It has also been criticised for having gameable design features which in practice lead to well-resourced technology companiesdominating the processand bad faith actors high-jacking the process. Some have also questioned whether the current process is fit for purpose to deliver law-clarifying standards for digital technologies as part of the EU’s digital agenda. This concern is particularly relevant to AI standards development, given the complex and sometimes controversial nature of AI technology.
The European Commissionannounced in 2022that it would take actions to ‘improve the governance and integrity of the European standardisation system’. At this time of writing this improvement initiative is still ongoing. As part of this initiative, the Commission hascollected inputvia open calls in 2023 and 2024. The 2024 written inputs have not been published in detail, but the 2023 written inputs can all be readhere. These inputs show extensive diversity in opinions between stakeholders. Some stakeholders report that the EU standardisation system is working well, and see no need for significant updates, while others report that it is not working well at all, and that significant reforms are needed.
Among this second group, a common theme is the need to ensure greater participation from non-industry players, such as independent academic experts. The need for more funding to support such players and removing other barriers to participation is often mentioned. An important feature of the current process is that, while it is open to participation by representatives and experts from a very broad range of stakeholders, by default none of these representatives or experts get paid for their work, or reimbursed for associated travel costs. While there are some limited funding sources to support participants from academia, small medium enterprises, and civil society organisations, many stakeholders feel that much more funding would be needed, in order to overcome the problem of including more stakeholders and experts. Reasons for including more parties would be to create more (trust in) democratically balanced outcomes, and to ensure that there is enough expertise and workforce in the committee to finish the standards writing process within reasonable time.
On how standardisation works in the EU and AI Act context:
Research papers and reports on various aspects of AI Act standards development, some of these include insights based on interviewing experts working in JTC21:
The scientific panel of independent experts (the Scientific Panel) is a body established under the EU AI Act to support the enforcement of rules on general-purpose AI (GPAI) models and systems. It sits within the Act's broader governance architecture as one of the...
The Advisory Forum (the Forum) is a general advisory body to the European Commission and the AI Board, established to provide technical expertise, advise them, and to contribute to their tasks under the EU AI Act. It sits within the Act’s broader governance...
What providers and deployers must do by August 2026
This page aims to provide an overview of the EU AI Act's enforcement provisions relating to Chapter V, namely the provisions that impose obligations on providers of general-purpose AI (GPAI) models. It also aims to explore the role that other actors can play in the...
If your business uses AI to screen, rank, or match candidates, the EU now regulates those tools as high-risk systems. Here is what changed, what it means for your operating model, and what you should be doing about it.