If you are unsure who is implementing and enforcing the EU AI Act and what the specific time frames are, you might find this post—and our post on theresponsibilities of the European Commission (AI Office)—very helpful. The tables below provide you with a comprehensive list of all obligations and tasks that the AI Act places upon Member States.
Crosspost from:The AI Act: responsibilities of the EU Member Statesby Kai Zenner. We have reformatted the content for web and performed some editing for readability.
See a timeline of all key tasks required by the EU AI Act in 2024 and 2025, with references to the sources.
Since the technical negotiations on the AI Act have been concluded in January 2024, I hear very different numbers and deadlines when it comes to secondary legislation and other implementing and enforcement tasks on the EU and national level. No one seems to know what role the AI Office, Member States, and public authorities have to play from now on. So, I spent the last two weeks reading the AI Act, while looking for the obligations that the law gives to Member States and the respective time frames to fulfil those tasks.
The result: similar to the AI Office, the national level faces many new obligations with sometimes very tight deadlines. In total, I have identified88 responsibilitiesfor the national level:
I hope that this list is helpful for civil society, academics, and SMEs that do not have the necessary resources to monitor the implementation and enforcement of the AI Act on the EU level. These tables should allow them to identify their key priorities and to focus their activities with regards to monitoring Member States.
According toArticle 113, the EU AI Act enters into force on1 August 2024, which is twenty days after its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union on 12 July 2024.
Consequently, the new law becomes applicable on2 August 2026,which istwenty-four monthsfrom the date of the entry into force.
See here for a fullimplementation timelinewhich includes all key milestones listed here, and more.
There are however three special transition periods for certain categories of articles in the AI Act:
Our goal is to build themost useful, authoritative, and comprehensive guide to the AI Act anywhere on the internet. We’ll never put this behind a paywall or use it to sell you a service. We do this because we think good AI governance matters, and that means making authoritative guidance genuinely accessible.
If you want to help us out, please considercontributing a guest postto help others understand and navigate the Act, orsend your ideas and feedbackfor the website to me (Taylor, Design & Web Manager) at:websites@futureoflife.org. To stay up-to-date,subscribe to our bi-weeklyAI Act newsletter, the world’s most trusted regular AI Act publication with over 50,000+ subscribers. We’ve published over 100 updates since 2022.
This website is built and maintained by theFuture of Life Institute— the world’s oldest and largest nonprofit working for the responsible development of AI.
Article 111lays down specific rules for AI systems and GPAI models that have been already placed on the market / put into service before the AI Act entered into force. It presents three cases:
All time frames in the third column of the tables below assume that the AI system has been place on the market / put into service after 2 August 2026 or that the GPAI model has been placed on the market / put into service after 2 August 2025.
Recital153/154andArticle 70underline that Member States play a key role in the application and enforcement of the AI Act. Each one of them shoulddesignate at least one notifying authority and at least one market surveillance authority as national competent authorities. The market surveillance authority or one of them should thereby act as single point of contact.
Member States can appoint any kind of public entity (i.e. competition authority, data protection authority, cybersecurity agency) to perform the tasks of the national competent authorities, in accordance with their specific national organizational characteristics and needs. For instance, Germany decided to appoint its Federal Accreditation Body (‘Deutsche Akkreditierungsstelle’) as notifying authority and its Federal Network Agency (‘Bundesnetzagentur’) as market surveillance authority.
The national competent authorities should exercise their powers independently, impartially and without bias, to safeguard the principles of objectivity of their activities and tasks and to ensure the application and implementation of the AI Act. The members of these authorities should refrain from any action incompatible with their duties and should be subject to confidentiality rules.
InArticle 3, we find the legal definitions with regard to the national implementation and enforcement system. Point (19) defines that ‘notifying authority’ are the national authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring. Point (26) defines that ‘market surveillance authority’ are the national authority carrying out the activities and taking the measures pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. Lastly, point (48) defines that ‘national competent authority’ are a notifying authority or a market surveillance authority.
This document lists the responsibilities of each Member State as well as its national competent authorities, meaning their designated notifying authority and market surveillance authority. It does not specify which of the entities is fulfilling the respective task.
These tables can also be viewed as aninfographic(courtesy ofSimone Mohrs).
If you found this post useful, you may also wish to see our post on theresponsibilities of the European Commission (AI Office).
Corrections: Please let us know if you find any mistakes. Due to the complexity of this project some details may have been overlooked. This post will be updated according to new information and user feedback.
The scientific panel of independent experts (the Scientific Panel) is a body established under the EU AI Act to support the enforcement of rules on general-purpose AI (GPAI) models and systems. It sits within the Act's broader governance architecture as one of the...
The Advisory Forum (the Forum) is a general advisory body to the European Commission and the AI Board, established to provide technical expertise, advise them, and to contribute to their tasks under the EU AI Act. It sits within the Act’s broader governance...
What providers and deployers must do by August 2026
This page aims to provide an overview of the EU AI Act's enforcement provisions relating to Chapter V, namely the provisions that impose obligations on providers of general-purpose AI (GPAI) models. It also aims to explore the role that other actors can play in the...
If your business uses AI to screen, rank, or match candidates, the EU now regulates those tools as high-risk systems. Here is what changed, what it means for your operating model, and what you should be doing about it.