CEN and CENELEC confirm their full commitment to delivering comprehensive, inclusive, and high-quality European Standards in support of theArtificial Intelligence Act(AIA).
During the joint meeting of the BT (Technical Boards) between14–16 October 2025, both CEN and CENELEC adopted anexceptional package of measuresto accelerate the delivery of key standards developed underCEN-CLC/JTC 21 “Artificial Intelligence”,and the deliverables requested underStandardization Request M/593(and itsAmendment M/613).
These measures concern a set of work items that form the technical foundation of the future European standards supporting the AI Act. To ensure these standards are available byQ4 2026, the Boards agreed to:
Thisexceptional decision, taken in consultation with institutional partners and Annex III organizations, reflects the duty to balancetimely deliverywithinclusiveness, transparency, and consensus- principles that remain at the heart of European standardization.
Since its establishment in 2021,CEN-CLC/JTC 21has gathered thewidest participation of stakeholdersever engaged in European AI standardization, including representatives fromindustry, SMEs, academia, NGOs, and Annex III organizations. Inclusiveness has been a defining feature of this work, further reinforced by the creation of aTask Group on Inclusiveness, which has produced dedicated materials, organized workshops, conducted surveys, and issued regular newsletters to ensure broad and meaningful engagement.
The newly created drafting group will serve tofacilitate the development of the drafts, ensuring their timely technical consolidation, while preserving the open and participatory nature of the process. Each draft will be circulated to the respective Working Groups for information and final comments before being submitted topublic Enquiry, following thenormal route defined in the CEN and CENELEC Internal Regulations. The Enquiry stage remains open to all national members and stakeholders, ensuring full transparency and inclusiveness.
In line with the BT decision, if the Enquiry outcome is positive and the Formal Vote is therefore skipped, any comments received during the Enquiry will beaddressed in the next version of the standards, in which JTC 21 will begin preparing immediately after publication.
CEN and CENELEC acknowledge that this is anexceptional and temporary measure, designed to help the European Standardization System respond to the urgent demand for AI standards that will support the effective implementation of the AI Actand ensure that these technical contents fully meet European needs.
In the coming weeks, further progress will be made, including thelaunch of the Enquiry for prEN 18286 Quality Management Systems, one of the key deliverables supporting the future conformity-assessment framework under the AI Act.
For additional information, please contactmedia@cencenelec.eu.
Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as security, network management, and accessibility. You may disable these by changing your browser settings, but this may affect how the website functions.
We'd like to set Google Analytics cookies to help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on how you use it. The cookies collect information in a way that does not directly identify anyone.