Space, soccer and struggles for peace: what lies ahead in the new year?
(Image credit: Illustration by Stephen Kelly / Getty Images / Shutterstock)
Share
Copy link
Facebook
X
Linkedin
Whatsapp
Pinterest
Share this article
Join the conversation
Follow us
Add us as a preferred source on Google
Newsletter
TheWeek
Get the The Week UK Newsletter
A free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.com
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the
Terms & Conditions
and
Privacy Policy
and are aged 16 or over.
You are now subscribed
Your newsletter sign-up was successful
An account already exists for this email address, please log in.
Subscribe to our newsletter
“Overall, it feels like last year was the prologue and this year is the first chapter, one in which the storylines can really get some momentum behind them,” said
Russh
.
The magazine was describing horoscope forecasts for the coming year, but it could just as easily have been talking about how politics and the global economy will be shaping up in 2026.
Last year, The Week accurately
predicted
Donald Trump’s tariffs, the first signs of an AI stock market bubble, the rise of the far-right in the UK and Europe, and a ceasefire in Gaza. So what could 2026 have in store?
Article continues below
You may like
Are we on the brink of World War Three?
People of the year 2025
The Week’s big New Year’s Day quiz 2026
Savour the important news.
Get unlimited access online, in app, or in print.
Start your free trial
Sign up for The Week's Free Newsletters
From our daily WeekDay news briefing to an award-winning Food & Drink email, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox.
From our daily WeekDay news briefing to an award-winning Food & Drink email, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox.
Sign up
Politics
UK local and devolved elections in May are being seen as a make-or-break moment for
Keir Starmer
and the Labour government.
Squeezed from the right by Reform UK and from the left by a revived Green Party and the new
Your Party
(as well as Plaid Cymru in Wales and the SNP in Scotland), it is already looking like being a torrid night of results for Labour. Across the board, the party faces “potential collapse” and, for the first time in a century, losing control of its Welsh heartland, said
Parli-Training
. Were that to happen, Starmer could be forced out of Downing Street by the summer, with Health Secretary Wes Streeting and Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood among the
favourites to replace him
.
US midterm elections are also looking pretty bleak for the incumbent
Republicans
. With
Donald Trump
’s approval ratings continuing to fall,
Democrats
have opened up a double-digit lead in voting intention for the congressional races in November, said the
Marist Poll
.
“Everywhere Republicans look, they see big political trouble,” said
Axios
, with poll after poll showing support among swing voters down “on just about everything Republicans do, other than fighting crime and shutting the southwest border”.
Sign up for Today's Best Articles in your inbox
A free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.com
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
In Europe, all eyes will be on the Hungarian parliamentary election in April, where Viktor Orbán’s 16-year rule could end. Elsewhere, global research firm
BMI
sees a “greater likelihood of victories by the centre-right/right-wing opposition” in
Brazil
, Colombia and Peru, “while
Israel
could also see a political shift”.
The opaque process to select the next UN Secretary-General also takes place over the coming year, with the successful candidate formally taking up their post on 1 January 2027. Among those already declared or expected to throw their hat in the ring is Michelle Bachelet, former president of Chile and former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Jacinda Ardern, former PM of New Zealand, and Kristalina Georgieva, managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Economics
Following a bumpy year in which Trump’s
tariff
war played havoc with trade but markets continued to post record returns driven by
AI
investment, the outlook for the global economy in 2026 remains “dim”.
What to read next
Greenland, Colombia, Cuba: where is Donald Trump eyeing up next?
Biggest political break-ups and make-ups of 2025
The biggest viral moments of 2025
That is the assessment of the
IMF
’s latest World Economic Outlook, which “makes for sobering reading”, said
Love Money
. Growth is forecast at 3.2% next year, with “much of the drag” stemming from “US tariffs and the wider shift towards protectionism, which is sapping international trade, undermining confidence, and rattling markets”.
Interest rates (in the US, UK and elsewhere) are expected to continue to fall, however, while fears persist that this is the year the
AI bubble
could finally burst. Analysis from financial services firm Wedbush, reported by
Investing.com
, predicts tech stocks will be “up another 20% in 2026 as this next stage of the AI Revolution hits its stride”.
“Don’t count on the AI bubble popping immediately – but don’t count it out, either,” said
Mashable
, with chip maker Nvidia’s next quarterly earnings report, due in January, being a key moment to watch out for.
Conflicts
Despite repeated attempts to
agree an end to the war between Russia and Ukraine
, fighting continues to rage in what is now Europe’s bloodiest conflict since the Second World War.
With Kremlin forces making slow but steady gains but at a terrible cost to life, the “arithmetic of attrition suggests that 2026 will bring either glacial progress, a conflict frozen from exhaustion, or some sort of deal”, said
The Economist
. “Two other scenarios are possible: a Ukrainian frontline or political collapse, aided by Kremlin subversion; or
Russia
’s economy buckling as aerial attacks shut down its oil industry”, but “either of the two would have massive consequences for Europe, and the world”.
Other conflict hotspots include
India
/
Pakistan
following a deadly skirmish in 2025, Congo/Rwanda, and the ongoing civil war in Sudan. Tensions are mounting between
China and Taiwan
, although 2027 is seen as the more likely date for an invasion as it marks the centenary of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army.
Donald Trump continues to threaten conflict against Venezuela but if he is persuaded to back down, manages to maintain the Gaza ceasefire and
negotiates an end to the war in Ukraine, he could be in the running for next year’s Nobel Peace Prize announced in October.
On the pitch and out of this world
Fresh from winning the inaugural Fifa Peace Prize, Trump will be looking to use the
2026 men’s football World Cup
– this year jointly hosted by the US, Canada and Mexico – to push his Maga agenda even further.
Sixteen venues across the continent will host the biggest-ever edition of the tournament, with the number of teams increasing from 32 to 48 and the tally of games upped from 64 to 104. While it is still six months until the first ball is kicked, sports statistics platform
Opta Analyst
has crunched the numbers and predicted that Euro 2024 champions Spain are the most likely to win the Jules Rimet trophy, followed by France, England, Argentina and Germany.
Before that, there is the small matter of the Milan-Cortina Winter Olympics taking place in February.
A little further from home, the Nasa-led
Artemis
II mission will attempt the first manned orbit of the Moon in over half a century. The four-person crew will embark on a 10-day flight to “explore the Moon for scientific discovery, economic benefits, and to build the foundation for the first crewed missions to Mars”, said the
BBC Sky at Night Magazine
.
Originally planned for April 2026, the mission could now launch as early as 5 February. And while it “won’t land on the lunar surface” it will take astronauts 5,000 nautical miles past the Moon and “further into space than any human has gone before”.
Explore More
The Week UK
Read more
World News
Are we on the brink of World War Three?
World News
People of the year 2025
Puzzles
The Week’s big New Year’s Day quiz 2026
Defence
Greenland, Colombia, Cuba: where is Donald Trump eyeing up next?
Latest in World News
World News
Recriminations fly as Iran war spreads to gas fields
World News
China’s role in the US-Israeli war on Iran
World News
Donald Trump’s mistakes in Iran
World News
Moscow dials up censorship with new ‘whitelist’ system
Latest in In depth
Health
Nicotine pouches are everywhere, from tech companies to the wellness industry
Health
Food ingredients that are banned in the EU but not the US
Education
Decline and fall: the rumoured demise of English literature
Education
Phones in schools: to ban or not to ban?